---



layout: post



title :  (Topology)  Separation Theorems in the Plane



date : 2018-01-20 10:52:04 +0900



---

10	Separation Theorems in the Plane

10.1	Jordan Separation Theorem

10.1.1	(Lem 61.1) Let C be a compact subspace of S^{2}; let b be a point of S^{2} – C; and let h be a homeomorphism of S^{2} – b with \mathbb{R}^{2}. Suppose U is a component of S^{2} -C. If U does not contain b, then h(U) is a bounded component of \mathbb{R}^{2} – h(C). If U contains b, then h(U-b) is the unbounded component of \mathbb{R}^{2} – h(C).

10.1.2	(Nulhomotopy lemma) (Lem 61.2) : Let a and b be points of S^{2}. Let A be a compact space, and let f: A->S^{2} – a – b be a continuous map. If a and b lie in the same component of S^{2} – f(A), then f is nulhomotopic.

10.1.3	A separates X ( a subset A of a connected space X ) : X – A is not connected

10.1.4	A separates X into n components ( a subset A of a connected space X ): X-A has n components

10.1.5	Simple closed curve : a space homeomorphic to the unit circle S^{1}.

10.1.6	(Jordan separation theorem) (Thm 61.3) : Let C be a simple closed curve in S^{2}. Then C separates S^{2}.

10.1.6.1	Pf) (Thm 59.1)(Thm 55.3) (Nulhomotopy lemma) 

10.1.7	(General Separation theorem) (Thm 61.4) Let A_{1} and A_{2} be closed connected subsets of S^{2} whose intersection consists of precisely two points a and b. Then the set C = A_{1} \cup A_{2} separates S^{2}.

10.2	Invariance of Domain

10.2.1	(Homotopy extension lemma) (Lem 62.1) Let X be a space such that X \times I is normal. Let A be a closed subspace of X, and let f : A->Y be a continuous map, where Y is an open subspace of \mathbb{R}^{n}. If f is nulhomotopic, then f may be extended a continuous map g : X ->Y that is also nulhomotopic.

10.2.1.1	Pf) (Tietze Extension theorem)

10.2.2	(Borsuk lemma) (Lem 62.2) Let a and b be points of S^{2}. Let A be a compact space, and let f : A -> S^{2} – a – b be a continuous injective map. If f is nulhomotopic, then a and b lie in the same component of S^{2} – f(A).

10.2.2.1	Pf) (preceding lemma) Let A be a compact subspace of \mathbb{R} ^{2} - \mathbf{0}. If the inclusion j : A -> \mathbb{R} ^{2} - \mathbf{0} is nulhomotopic, then \mathbf{0} lies in the unbounded component of \mathbb{R} ^{2} – A.

10.2.3	(Invariance of domain) (Thm 62.3) If U is an open subset of \mathbb{R} ^{2} and f: U-> \mathbb{R} ^{2} is continuous and injective, then f(U) is open in \mathbb{R} ^{2} and the inverse function f^{-1} : f(U) -> U is continuous.

10.2.3.1	Pf) (Borsuk lemma)

10.3	Jordan Curve theorem

10.3.1	(Thm 63.1) Let X be the union of two open sets U abd V, such that U \cap V can be written as the union of two disjoint open sets A and B. Assume that there is a path \alpha in U from a point a of A to a point b of B, and that there is a path \beta in V from b to a. Let f be the loop f = \alpha * \beta.

10.3.1.1	The path-homotopy class [ f ] generates an infinite cyclic subgroup of \pi_{1} (X,a). 

10.3.1.2	If \pi_{1} (X,a) is itself infinite cyclic, it is generated by [ f].

10.3.1.3	Assume there is a path \gamma in U from a to the point a’ of A, and that there is a path \delta in V from a’ to a. Let g be the loop g = \gamma * \delta. Then the subgroups of \pi_{1} (X,a) generated by [ f ] and [ g ] intersect in the identity element alone.

10.3.2	(Nonseparation theorem) (Thm 63.2)  Let D be an arc in S^{2}. Then D does not separate S^{2}.

10.3.2.1	Pf) (Borsuk lemma) (Thm 63.1) 

10.3.3	(General Nonseparation theorem) (Thm 63.3) Let D_{1} and D_{2} be closed subsets of S^{2} s.t. S^{2} – D_{1} \cap D_{2} is simply connected. If neither D_{1} nor D_{2} separates S^{2}, then D_{1} \cup D_{2} does not separate S^{2}.

10.3.4	(Jordan Curve theorem) (Thm 63.4) Let C be a simple closed curve in S^{2}. Then C separates S^{2} into precisely two components W_{1} and W_{2}. Each of the sets W_{1} and W_{2} has C as its boundary; that is C = \bar{W_{i}} – W_{i} for i = 1,2.

10.3.4.1	Pf) (Jordan separation theorem) (thm 63.1)

10.3.5	(Thm 63.5) Let C_{1} and C_{2} be closed connected subsets of S^{2} whose intersection consists of two points. If neither C_{1} nor C_{2} separates S^{2}, then C_{1} \cup C_{2} separates S^{2} into precisely two componenets.

10.3.6	(Schoenflies theorem) : If C is a simple closed curve in S^{2} and U and V are the components of S^{2} – C, then \bar{U} and \bar{V} are each homeomorphic to the closed unit ball B^{2}.

10.4	Imbedding graphs in the plane

10.4.1	Linear graph G : a Hausdorff space that is written as the union of finitely many arcs.

10.4.1.1	Complete graph on n vertices : G contains exactly n vertices, and if for every pair of distinct vertices of G there is an edge of G joining them

10.4.2	Theta space : a Hausdorff space that is written as the union of three arcs A, B, and C, each pair of which intersects precisely in their end points.

10.4.3	(Lem 64.1) Let X be a theta space that is a subspace of S^{2}; let A, B and C be the arcs whose union is X. Then X separates S^{2} into three components, whose boundaries are A\cup B , B \cup C, and A \cup C, respectively. The component having A \cup B as its boundary equals one of the components of S^{2} – A \cup B.

10.4.3.1	Pf) (Thm  63.5)

10.4.4	(Thm 64.2) Let X be the utilities graph. Then X cannot be imbedded in the plane.

10.4.4.1	Utilities graph : given three houses h_{1}, h_{2}, h_{3}, and three utilities, g (gas), w(water), and e(electricity), Can you connect each utility to each house without letting any of the connecting lines cross?

10.4.5	(Lem 64.3) Let X be a subspace of S^{2} that is a complete graph on four vertices a_{1}, a_{2} , a_{3} and a_{4}. Then X separates S^{2} into four components. The boundaries of these components are the sets X_{1}, X_{2}, X_{3} and X_{4}, where X_{i} is the union of those edges of X that do not have a_{i} as a vertex.

10.4.6	(Thm 64.4) The complete graph on five vertices cannot be imbedded in the plane.

10.5	Winding number of a simple closed curve

10.5.1	(Lem 65.1) Let G be a subspace of S^{2} that is a complete graph on four vertices a_{1}, …, a_{4}. Let C be the subgraph a_{1}a_{2}a_{3}a_{4}a_{1}, which is a simple closed curve. Let p and q be interior points of the edges a_{1}a_{3} and a_{2}a_{4}, respectively. Then

10.5.1.1	The points p and q lie in different components of S^{2} – C.

10.5.1.2	The inclusion j : C -> S^{2} – p – q induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.

10.5.1.2.1	Pf) (Lem 64.1)(Lem 64.3)

10.5.1.3	Let C be a simple closed curve in S^{2}; let p and q lie in different components of S^{2} – C. Then the inclusion mapping j : C -> S^{2} – p – q induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.

10.5.1.3.1	Pf) (Cor 58.5)

10.6	Cauchy integral formula

10.6.1	Winding number of f with respect to a ( a point a not in the image of a loop f in \mathbb{R}^{2}) : Let g(s) = [f(s) – a] / \Vert f(s) – a \Vert then g is a loop in S^{1}. Let p : \mathbb{R} -> S^{1} be the standard covering map, and let \bar{g} be  a lifting of g to S^{1}. Because g is a loop, the difference \bar{g}(1) - \bar{g}(0) is an integer. This integer is winding number of f w.r.t. a .

10.6.1.1	n( f, a ) <- winding number of f with respect to a

10.6.2	Free homotopy F between the loops f_{0} and f_{1} (a continuous map F : I \times I -> X ) : Let F(0,t) = F(1,t) for all t. Then for each t, the map f_{t}(s) = F(s,t) is a loop in X.

10.6.2.1	It is a homotopy of loops in which the base point of the loop is allowed to move during the homotopy.

10.6.3	(Lem 66.1) Let f be a loop in \mathbb{R}^{2} – a.

10.6.3.1	If \bar{f} is the reverse of f, then n(\bar{f} , a) = -n (f, a).

10.6.3.2	If f is freely homotopic to f’, through loops lying in \mathbb{R}^{2}-a, then n(f,a) = n(f’, a).

10.6.3.3	If a and b lie in the same component of \mathbb{R}^{2} – f(1), then n(f,a) = n(f,b).

10.6.3.4	Simple loop f (a loop f in X) : f(s) = f(s’) only if s = s’ or if one of the points s, s’ is 0 and the other is 1. 

10.6.3.4.1	If f is a simple loop, its image set is a simple closed curve in X.

10.6.3.5	(Thm 66.2) Let f be a simple loop in \mathbb{R}^{2}. If a lies in the unbounded component of \mathbb{R}^{2} – f(1), then n(f,a) = 0; while if a lies in the bounded component, n(f,a) = \mp 1.

10.6.3.5.1	Pf) (Thm 54.5)

10.6.3.6	Counterclockwise loop f (a simple loop f in \mathbb{R}^{2}) : n(f,a) = +1 for some a (and hence for every a) in the bounded componenet of \mathbb{R}^{2} – f(1).

10.6.3.6.1	Clockwise loop f if n(f,a) = -1.

10.6.3.7	(Lem 66.3) Let f be a piecewise-differentiable loop in the complex plane; let a be a point not in the image of f. Then n(f,a) = \frac{1}{2 \pi i} \int_{f} \frac{dz}{z-a}

10.6.3.7.1	Definition of the winding number of f : \frac{1}{2 \pi i} \int_{f} \frac{dz}{z-a}

10.6.3.8	(Cauchy integral formula-classical version) (Thm 66.4) Let C be a simple closed piecewise-differentiable curve in the complex plane. Let B be the bounded component of \mathbb{R}^{2} – C. If F(z) is analytic in an open set \Omega that contains B and C, then for each point a of B, F(a) = \mp \frac{1}{2 \pi i} \int_{C} \frac{F(z)}{z-a} dz

10.6.3.8.1	+ sign if C is oriented counterclockwise, and – otherwise.

